In this lecture, you'll learn how to do a basic configuration of OSPF on our Cisco routers. So to
enable OSPF, the top level command at global config is 'router ospf' and then, a Process ID. So you can
see in the example here,
I've said 'router ospf 1'.
Different interfaces on a router can run in different instances or different Process IDs of
OSPF. Different instances have different Link
State Databases (LSDB), so they run separately.
Only one instance is typically configured on OSPF routers. Multiple Process IDs are very rarely
used.
It's not normal to have different Process IDs on the router.
The Process ID is locally significant. Meaning,
it does not have to match on the neighbor router for them to form an adjacency.
You'll see what I mean about that coming up on the next slide.
So in the example below, we've got 3 routers, R1, R2, and R3, with R2 in the middle. On R3,
both interfaces have been put in Process ID 1. On R2, the left hand interface is in Process ID 2,
the right hand interface is in Process ID 3, and on R1, its left hand interface is in Process ID 4.
R2 will form adjacencies both with R3 and with R1.
So even though the Process ID is different on the routers, that's a locally significant number. It does
not have to match on both sides,
so the routers will still form adjacencies. In our example here, on R2, the left hand and the right hand
interfaces are in two different processes.
So they're going to have separate Link State Databases, and information is not going to be shared between
the two sides.
So R1 and R3 will not learn routes to each other because both sides are in different process IDs
on router R2. The way we would configure this is on R2, we say 'router ospf 2' at global config,
and then 'network 10.0.0.0', the wildcard mask,
'0.0.0.255 area 0', and then for the other interface, we say 'router ospf 3' and
'network 10.1.0.0 0.0.0.255 area 0'.
Okay, so that's how you can have different processes for OSPF running on the same router.
It is absolutely not normal to do that.
Very rare that you would see this.
I'm just showing you it here so that you can fully understand what the Process ID is.
What is more normal is where all the routers in your network are all using the same Process ID number
So you can see here now on routers R1, R2, and R3, the same topology as before, we've configured
OSPF Process ID 1 on all interfaces. On R2, we say 'router ospf 1', network 10.0.0.0 and
network 10.1.0.0 are both under Process ID 1, and now, R1 and R3 will learn routes to each
other.
Don't worry about the area statement on the end here yet, we're going to cover what areas are and how
they work towards the end of this section. Okay,
so we configured router OSPF and usually we'll use a Process ID of 1. The next command to use is the network
command.
This is pretty much the same as the network command we had for EIGRP as well. So network, and then
the network address, space, and then the wildcard mask, which is the inverse of the subnet mask, and then
specify the area. If you've got a small network, you can just put everything in area 0.
Again, we'll cover areas in more detail later on.
So network command uses a wildcard mask rather than a subnet mask, which is the inverse of the subnet
mask.
So if your subnet mask was 255.255.0.0, your wildcard mask would be 0.0.255.255.
If your subnet mask was 255.255.255.252, your wildcard mask would be 0.0.0.3.
To figure out the wildcard mask, just subtract these octets in the subnet mask from 255.
Next thing, in EIGRP,
if you specify the network statement and you don't include a wildcard mask, it defaults to using the
classful wildcard mask. For example, 0.255.255.255
for the Class A. In OSPF, it does not default to doing that.
You have to enter the wildcard mask in OSPF. If you try entering a network statement without a wildcard mask,
it's going to give you an error message.
What the network command means is the same as it was in EIGRP.
Look for interfaces with an IP address which falls within that range and then enable OSPF on those
interfaces. Meaning, send out and listen for OSPF Hello messages and peer with adjacent OSPF routers.
Once the adjacency has been formed, advertise the network and mask which is configured on those interfaces.
So the same example as we had before
for EIGRP, you see we've got R1 here. FastEthernet0/0 has got IP address 10.1.0.1/24,
FastEthernet1/0 is on the 10.0.1.0/24 network, and FastEthernet2/0 is on the
10.0.2.0/24 network.
So we could put in 3 separate network statements to cover each of the interfaces, or we could just cover
them all with just one network statement.
Actually, in the example here,
we just want to turn on OSPF for interfaces
FastEthernet1/0 and FastEthernet2/0.
We don't want to include FastEthernet0/0. So we configure our network command,
'network 10.0.0.0 0.0.255.255 area 0'.
So all interfaces that have got an IP address that begins with 10.0 and then anything after that,
we're going to turn OSPF on for those interfaces.
So that will match on interface FastEthernet1/0 and FastEthernet2/0. FastEthernet0/0 begins
with 10.1,
so that is not included in the network statement. So, we're not going to turn OSPF on there.
The networks that will be advertised are 10.0.1.0/24 because that's the
subnet configured on the interface, and 10.0.2.0/24.
We do not advertise 10.0.0.0/16, which is what we configured in the network statement.
Okay,
the network statement does not say advertise this subnet.
The network statement says, look for interfaces which fall within this range, enable OSPF on interfaces,
and then advertise with subnet that is configured on that interface.
Okay, so that's how we do a basic configuration of OSPF.
Moving on to actually verifying it now.
To see your OSPF configuration, we can do a 'show run' and then pipe '|' it to 'section ospf'. That will show
all of the OSPF commands in your running config, whether they're under the main OSPF part of the configuration
or at the interface level.
So this is convenient to see all your OSPF commands, it's easier than doing a 'show run' and trying to
scroll down to the actual part of the config.
'show ip protocols'
will show all the routing protocols that are running on the router. You can see in the example here,
we're running OSPF with Process ID 1. You can see other information, like the networks
it's routing for, the routing information sources which are the OSPF neighbors, etc. 'show ip opf interface brief'
will show which interfaces have got OSPF enabled on them on this router,
the Process ID for the interface, the area, the IP address and mask, the cost for the metric, and how
many neighbors are reachable through that interface. With the OSPF operations that run in the router
after you enable it,
the first thing it does is it discovers neighbors and forms adjacencies.
So if you're going to verify that OSPF is working, it makes sense, the first thing to check is that it has
been able to form adjacencies.
The command to check that is 'show ip ospf neighbor'. Whenever I configure OSPF, the first command I always
do after that
once I've configured both sides of the link is 'show ip ospf neighbor', check that the routers can see each other and
they have formed an adjacency. So see in the example here, the neighbor ID
is 10.0.2.1 and it's reachable out interface FastEthernet0/0.
The next thing that happens with OSPF operations is the routers will flood the Link State Database (LSDB). To see if
routes have been learned from OSPF, you can use the 'show ip ospf database' command.
That will show all the links that are available in that area and throughout the OSPF network.
The next thing that happens is the routers will look at all the available possible paths, and they will
decide which is the best path using the Shortest Path First algorithm,
and put that best path into the routing table.
So, next command to verify is 'show ip route' and check that you've got OSPF routes in the routing table.
Again, when I configure OSPF, first command I'll use is 'show ip ospf neighbor',
check the adjacency has come up. The next command after that
I'll use a 'show ip route', and check that OSPF routes are in the routing table.
I won't normally look at the database unless the routing table does not contain the routes I was expecting,
and then, I'll use that more as a troubleshooting command.
Okay,
So that was how to do a basic configuration of OSPF. In the next lecture, we'll actually do this
in the lab.